CHI 2018 Papers

Reviews of submission #3603: "Pinyin Aware: Adaptive Chinese Input
Methods for Smartwatches"

------------------------ Submission 3603, Review 4 ------------------------

Reviewer:           AC

Expertise

   2  (Passing Knowledge)

Recommendation

    . . . Between possibly reject and neutral; 2.5 

Award Nomination

   If accepted, this paper would not be among the top 20% of papers presented at CHI

1AC: The Meta-Review

   The paper introduces two novel input methods (Growing Finals and Pinyin
   Syllables) for writing Chinese on circular smartwatches. An experiment
   compares the performance of the two techniques against a standard QWERTY
   keyboard. Although the results do not show any advantage of the two
   techniques in terms of typing speed, the two techniques reduced errors
   and received positive feedback from users. 

   The reviewers identify several strengths in this work. According to R1,
   the paper presents "two clever ideas to improve Mandarin Chinese text
   entry on smartwatches." R3 praises the authors for trying to "improve
   text for non-Latin languages" as those are "rarely studied." R2 finds
   that the paper is "well written and easy to follow," while the study is
   "well designed, described, and executed." Despite all these positive
   comments, all the reviewers have very similar concerns and do not argue
   for accepting the paper. In particular, the reviewers point out that
   important details about the implementation of the  adaptive algorithms
   and the keyboards are missing (R1, R2, R3). They further question the
   efficiency of the proposed designs (R1, R2, R3), while they also point to
   limitations of the experiment and the data analysis (R1, R2, R3). The
   main problems, as identified by the reviewers, can be summarized as
   follows:

   1. Implementation Details. The lack of details about the design and
   implementation of the proposed techniques is the most critical concern of
   all reviewers. R1 asks several questions about how the adaptive
   algorithms and the two keyboard techniques work. In the same line, R3
   does not fully understand the keyboards' behavior as demonstrated in the
   paper and the videos. The reviewer asks for additional information about
   how "Growing Finals enlarges the ambiguous keys" and "how Pinyin
   Syllables arranges the layout." Western readers may have an even harder
   time to underhand the techniques. Personally, I could not figure out how
   the techniques work, neither understand the underlying designs
   principles. The authors may need additional space to adequately describe
   the techniques but also to justify their design choices and explain why
   and how their solutions optimize typing performance. Without enough
   detail, "the keyboard adapting algorithms seems to be arbitrary" (R3).

   2. Effectiveness of Proposed Designs. R2 is concerned about the fact that
   the size and position of the keys changes dynamically, which may hurt
   users' familiarity with the keyboard over time. The reviewer suspects
   that this dynamic behavior may increase "visual search" and might be the
   reason for the lower typing speed of the two proposed keyboards.    

   3. User Study and Data Analysis. All the reviewers express their
   disappointment about the typing speed of the proposed techniques. R1
   suggests that a longer study over several days might be a better choice.
   This would allow the authors to reduce the effect of familiarity of
   participants with the techniques but also to investigate the techniques'
   learning curve. R2 is curious about the high error of the techniques in
   comparison with existing techniques. R3 finds that the control condition
   (QWERTY) was not optimally designed. In addition, R3 is skeptical about
   the authors' conclusions based on participants' subjective feedback. 
     
   Although the chances for accepting the submission are low, the authors
   can submit a rebuttal to address any misunderstandings. Overall, this
   work looks very promising, but it may not be ready for publication. A
   longer paper that clearly explains the techniques and includes the
   results of a longer study might be a good direction for the next steps of
   this work.

Rebuttal response

   (blank)


------------------------ Submission 3603, Review 2 ------------------------

Reviewer:           2AC

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

Recommendation

    . . . Between possibly reject and neutral; 2.5 

Award Nomination

   (blank)

Review

   Presents two new types of adaptive keyboards for Chinese input on
   smartwatches. Both designs change the keyboard layout dynamically based
   on user input and the resulting number of possible letters, which in turn
   creates larger keys that can potentially increase text entry speed and
   accuracy.

   Overall, this paper is well written and easy to follow. The study is well
   designed, described, and executed. The study result is also clearly
   presented. However, the techniques in their current state do not deliver
   the level of promise I expect from CHI with the primary reason being the
   lack of insight into exactly how the techniques work and whether they
   could even beat QWERTY.

   One issue I found in both techniques is that dynamically changing the
   size and location of the keyboard keys may make it difficult for the
   users to gain familiarity with the keyboard layout over time. For
   example, the enlarged keys of the Growing Finals technique do not always
   occupy the exact same region, which could make it difficult for the users
   to remember/predict the key region, thus may slow the users down.
   Additionally, Pinyin Syllables shift the position of the keys based on
   users’ input. This again could impact the efficiency of the technique
   as the users may need to spend extra time on visual search. Table 1
   clearly shows that Pinyin Syllables’ lowest keystrokes per Chinese
   character do not translate to improved text entry speed. Another issue is
   that the error rates for both techniques are quite high in compassion to
   the existing techniques (e.g., 5.67% for DualKey) but no insight is
   provided to help understand the reason why.

   My overall feeling is that this work has a great potential, but it
   requires further investigation to ensure the aforementioned issues can be
   well addressed. As in its current state, the work is premature to warrant
   publication at this year’s CHI.

Rebuttal response

   (blank)


------------------------ Submission 3603, Review 1 ------------------------


Expertise

   4  (Expert )

Recommendation

    . . . Between possibly reject and neutral; 2.5 

Award Nomination

   If accepted, this paper would not be among the top 20% of papers presented at CHI

Review

   Paper introduces 2 novel adaptive keyboards, Growing Finals and Pinyin
   Syllables, for typing Mandarin Chinese using the Hanyu Pinyin System on
   circular smartwatch devices. A 15-participant user study reveals input
   speeds of around 19.4 CCPM for Growing Finals and 18.5 CCPM for Pinyin
   Syllables. Performance of 2 novel keyboards is compared with a baseline
   keyboard, Standard QWERTY. 

   Generally speaking, this paper presents two clever ideas to improve
   Mandarin Chinese text entry on smartwatches. Both of the keyboards
   exploit special and intrinsic characteristics of the Hanyu Pinyin system.
   Considering the limited screen size, enlarging possible next letter key
   by removing impossible letters could reduce the input error rate.
   However, there are still many issues that need to be addressed to make it
   a meaningful paper for CHI. Below is a list of issues.

   1. Missing Implementation details 
   	- For Growing Finals keyboard, I wonder how you determine each possible
   letter’s area after entering the initial letter? For example, in figure
   2, “u” appears differently in 2) and 3). I am confused why there are
   still some areas in grey. Would it be better to take fully advantage of
   the screen size to make each key larger? And what is your division
   algorithm behind this?  Do you have any data or study to support your
   algorithm?
   	- Similar issue in Pinyin Syllables keyboard. It is still unclear to me
   how to display all possible finals for the current input state. Although
   authors have mentioned in the paper that “finals with similar sounds
   are grouped by color and placed near corresponding QWERT keys if
   possible”, many implementation details are still missing in the paper. 
   	- For Pinyin Syllables keyboard, I am also curious about the
   corresponding percentage of different numbers of possible buttons (2 ~
   24) in the second stage. If for most cases, there are too many possible
   buttons in the second stage (e.g. figure 3), then this keyboard would be
   less useful since it is hard for users to remember too many different
   layouts. 

   2. Evaluation
   	- Although I understand such a short period of time puts unfamiliar
   novel input methods at a distinct disadvantage, I am still disappointed
   seeing the text entry speed comparison results. Maybe a study with
   several days (e.g. [1]) is necessary to prove the effectiveness of the
   input methods.
   	-  I am also interested in the learning curve of two novel input
   methods. Besides conducting a study with several days, it is also common
   to divide testing sentences into several blocks and demonstrate the
   performance in different blocks (e.g. [2]). 
   	- Missing statistical analysis of subjective feedback section.

   [1] Aakar Gupta and Ravin Balakrishnan. 2016. DualKey: Miniature Screen
   Text Entry via Finger Identification. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
   Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '16). ACM, New
   York, NY, USA, 59-70. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858052
   [2] Chun Yu, Ke Sun, Mingyuan Zhong, Xincheng Li, Peijun Zhao, and
   Yuanchun Shi. 2016. One-Dimensional Handwriting: Inputting Letters and
   Words on Smart Glasses. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on
   Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
   71-82. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858542

Rebuttal response

   (blank)


------------------------ Submission 3603, Review 3 ------------------------


Expertise

   4  (Expert )

Recommendation

   Possibly Reject: The submission is weak and probably shouldn't be accepted, but there is some chance it should get in; 2.0 

Award Nomination

   If accepted, this paper would not be among the top 20% of papers presented at CHI

Review

   This paper proposed two software keyboards for typing Mandarin Chinese on
   small devices, and compared them with the standard QWERTY keyboard. The
   two keyboards adapt dynamically based on the current input and the
   Chinese language model. The viability of these text-entry techniques is
   demonstrated with a controlled user study. Results showed no improvement
   in text entry rate, but most participants preferred one of the two
   keyboards due to reduced error rates and more efficient input mechanics.

   It is laudable that the authors want to improve text entry for non-Latin
   languages, not only because they are rarely studied but also because of
   the particularity of these language models. This paper reveals two useful
   intrinsic characteristics of the Pinyin romanization system: first, the
   Mandarin Chinese language model is so small that except the first letter
   in a Pinyin syllable, only 9 unique Latin characters is possible; second,
   each Pinyin syllable is a combination of an initial sound and a final
   sound. The two proposed keyboards were based on these characteristic.

   Unfortunately, there are a few critical issues in both technical
   implementations and the user study.

   1. Technical implementations
   First, the explanation of the two input methods is far from sufficient.
   In order to optimize the user experience, it is important to know how
   Growing Finals enlarges the ambiguous keys, and how Pinyin Syllables
   arranges the layout. However, this paper gives no description of these
   algorithms.

   Second, the keyboard adapting algorithms seem to be arbitrary. I tried to
   understand the two keyboards from inputting examples and the video, but I
   found some strange behavior of them. For example, in Figure 2 (3), the
   key group ‘u’ do not include the useless ’o’ and ‘k’, but
   robs ’t’ from the small key group ‘e’. At a moment in the video,
   the final sound ‘i’ is at the place of ‘r’, which is far from
   “preserving the general QWERTY layout”.

   Third, the baseline - the standard QWERTY is a bad design. The paper
   mentions that this keyboard is used on smartphones by most Chinese. It is
   erroneous. Almost all the text entry methods on smartphones involve
   statistical decoding against the fat finger problem. Because the two
   proposed keyboards leverage language model, it would be a fair comparison
   to implement a simple Bayesian algorithm in the baseline. A previous work
   has shown that a Bayesian algorithm achieves satisfactory levels of text
   input on tiny QWERTY keyboards (Yi, et al. “Is it too small?:
   Investigating the performances and preferences of users when typing on
   tiny QWERTY keyboards”).

   2. The user study
   First, the proposed keyboards do not improve text entry rate. In fact, I
   am afraid that the baseline may be significantly better - though one-way
   ANOVA does not show a statistically significant difference, there is a
   tendency (p = .08) that the standard QWERTY is faster. Actually, a
   repeated measures ANOVA is needed in a within study, which may lead to a
   significant difference.

   Second, the paper draws a few conclusions in Subjective Feedback, such as
   one keyboard leads in terms of perceived speed or perceived accuracy. But
   there is no statistical analysis to support them.

   Besides these two main points, there are several minor issues that are
   unclear or must be corrected:

   - The link of open-source implementation reveals information of the
   authors including their university. For a successful submission, the
   authors should submit a package of the project and declare it in the
   paper.
   - No error bar in Figure 5.
   - In figure 5, the Y-axis should begin at zero.
   - How long was the training time? Were the three keyboards easy to learn?
   - How long was the rest time between two blocks? Did it cause fatigue?

Rebuttal response

   (blank)



