Dear Reinhard Pointner -

last week we informed you that we regret to inform you that your submission 

  1032 - Pinyin Aware: Adaptive Chinese Input Methods for Smartwatches

for the MobileHCI 2018 conference has not been accepted. 

The reviews are now available in precision conference and are also enclosing them within this email. We hope that you find the reviews helpful for your future research work. 

Sincerely,

Susanne Boll and Alexandra Weilenmann
Program Chairs MobileHCI 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------

coordinator (1AC) review
score 2/5

  Overall

    Weak reject

  Inspiration

    Some insipiring elements

  The Review

    (blank)

  Expertise

    Expert

  The Meta Review

    The authors developed two new adaptive keyboards based on the Hanyu Pinyin system
    to enable the entry of Chinese text on tiny screens. They compared the new
    keyboard with the standard Qwerty on a smartwatch in a short-term within-subjects
    study involving 15 participants. Statistical analysis failed to find a significant
    effect of technique on entry speed. However, the new techniques yielded a
    significantly lower error rate and keystrokes per character. Subjective analysis
    also did not reveal a definite preference towards one technique.

    The paper is interesting and relevant. Personally, I believe much more research is
    needed to address text entry with languages other than English. Hence, I
    appreciate the work. However, there are two major issues with the work that
    refrains me and the reviewers from recommending “accept”.

    First, the results fail to establish superiority of the proposed approaches
    compared to the baseline, both in terms of entry speed and user preference [R4,
    R3], most likely due to participants’ preexisted familiarity with the Qwerty
    layout.

    Second, the first issue could have been addressed by collecting more data through
    a longitudinal study [R1, R2, R4], which is common practice in the evaluation of
    adaptive keyboards that dynamically changes layouts. Further, since both new
    techniques are developed based on the Hanyu Pinyin system, the authors should have
    used a between-subjects design to eliminate the possibility of skill transfer. It
    is possible that the data was contaminated due to this.

    In addition, R3 questions the novelty of the techniques and points out a potential
    error in data analysis.

    The paper is also missing some relevant work [see R2 and R3’s comments]. Further,
    this paper https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39516-6_24 reviews and compares
    several smartwatch text entry techniques.

    Moving forward, I suggest the authors address the above issues, and resubmit their
    work to another conference. I would like to see this work published in the future.

----------------------------------------------------------------

committee member (2AC) review
score 2/5

  Overall

    Weak reject

  Inspiration

    Many insipring elements

  The Review

    In this paper, the authors investigate two new input techniques for chinese
    characters, all based on pinyin.

    Compared to standard QWERTY, the two new techniques leverage unique features of
    the pinyin transliteration system:
    - for growing finals, they enlarge the size of most likely chosen keys
    - for pinyin syllabes, their technique will simply suggest a list of likely
    possibility to finish the current syllabes.

    These two techniques are compared to a QWERTY baseline in an experiment.

    Overall, the paper is easy to read, and I do appreciate the rationale here. The
    related work focuses on previous pinyin techniques and the experiment does not
    seem to have strong flaws.

    There is an issue though: sadly, the results seem to suggest that overall, the
    QWERTY method is still significantly faster, despite a slightly higher error rate.
    One would expect both new techniques to be more efficient, but I would assume this
    is likely due to prior knowledge (QWERTY method is currently a de facto standard
    on most mobile devices). I see encouraging results in this paper, but I also
    believe that the study could have been done in a way where the two techniques
    could have at outperformed or at least reached similar speed.

    Many text entry papers do rely on running multiple long sessions across the span
    of multiple weeks, to get participants used to new layouts/techniques. Another
    solution would be to test with people not familiar with pinyin at all, be it non
    chinese speakers or less tech savy people (e.g. many adults over 45+ are not used
    to the QWERTY pinyin input method), or run the study for a longer time.

    Before that improvement is done, I cannot argue for accepting this paper.

  Expertise

    Knowledgeable

----------------------------------------------------------------

reviewer 1 review
score 2/5

  Overall

    Weak reject

  Inspiration

    Some insipiring elements

  The Review

    Contribution 
    This paper proposed 2 novel adaptive keyboard layouts for Chinese text entry on
    smartwatches and evaluated the performances on three metrics comparing with the
    baseline standard QWERTY keyboard. This paper gives a clever and effective
    solution to solve the limited operation space problem of smartwatches. I think
    once users are accustomed to the input mode, the input efficiency of smartwatches
    will be greatly improved.

    Problems
    Sec 3.2: “An analysis of the language model reveals that for each of the 26
    initial sounds, there are between 2 and 24 (M = 15.4, SD = 5.6) possible final
    sounds”. I believe a citation should be given.
    Some abbreviations and concepts in the paper lack of necessary explanations and
    citations, such as M, SD (Sec 3.2), F, p (Sec 4.3.1), Holm-Bonferroni correction
    (Sec 4.3.2), P13 (Sec 4.3.4) .
    There are only 375 test samples for each layout, the experimental results of Table
    1 are inadequate and not rigorous enough.
    The calculation method of Figure 5 is not defined, and the degree of Satisfaction
    is lack of clear explanation. Please give a reasonable mathematical formula.
    Obviously, the adaptive keyboard will bring visual search problem. Users need to
    re-recognize the keyboard when input new key, which leads to a long time pause and
    will interrupt input, such problem is particularly evident in Pinyin Syllables. I
    wonder if there is a better solution to this problem.

  Expertise

    Expert

----------------------------------------------------------------

reviewer 2 review
score 2/5

  Overall

    Weak reject

  Inspiration

    Some insipiring elements

  The Review

    This paper introduces two novel Chinese adaptive keyboards for smartwatches. Using
    an opensource Chinese character prediction engine, these two keyboards show a
    limited number of possible subsequent letters, providing a better user experience
    on small watch screen. The authors conduct a user study with 15 participants. The
    two keyboards do not achieve significant better text entry speed. However, they
    reduce error rates and receive preference from participants.

    The authors mentioned the limitation of the user study that "each participant was
    only able to use each keyboard for about 20 minutes". A longer user study with
    multiple sessions (across multiple days) may help to better understand the
    performance of Growing Finals and Pinyin Syllables, and their learning curves.

    Growing Finals exploits an intrinsic characteristic of Pinyin: the first letter
    has 23 possibilities, while the rest letters only have 9 or fewer possibilities.
    The limited number of possibilities really helps to enlarge the area for each key.
    The authors do a good job in citing PinyinPie, which uses this intrinsic
    characteristic to optimize soft keyboard. The authors also mention, in further
    research, "entering the remaining letters of any Pinyin syllable requires no more
    than 6 unique possible next letters". Please cite this research as well. Pinyin
    Syllables further exploits this characteristic by predicting all possible rest
    letters combination. I suggest the authors to cite previous work that facilitates
    this characteristic as well.

    The authors may clarify that, in the baseline QWERTY keyboard, can user just type
    the first letter of each Chinese character and see predictions? From figures and
    videos, I notice users type all letters of each Chinese character. For many
    Chinese words, typing the first letter of each Chinese character is enough to
    predict the final word. It may increase typing speed significantly.

    I really appreciate that the authors decide to opensource their code so that other
    developers and researchers can build upon it and potentially do a comparison with
    other input methods. However, I suggest the authors create a separate repository
    using an anonymous account on Github. The Github link in the paper makes it
    possible to trace back to an author and the author's institute.

  Expertise

    Knowledgeable

----------------------------------------------------------------

reviewer 3 review
score 2/5

  Overall

    Weak reject

  Inspiration

    Uninspiring

  The Review

    In this submission, the authors designed and evaluated three software keyboards,
    i.e. Standard QWERTY, Growing Finals, and Pinyin Syllabus, to enter Chinese
    characters on smart watches. Among them, the Growth Finals design uses the
    regularity of character-level prefixes in pinyin syllabus to reduce the number of
    choices and enlarge the size of the next possible characters dynamically. The idea
    to use a character-level prefix model to input text input has been explored by
    MacKenzie et al (LetterWise [ref1]) for 12-key keypads, by Liu et al (PinyinPie
    [4]), and by Apple (in iOS keyboards for English and Pinyin, Apple iOS keyboards
    only adjusts the “virtual hitting region” rather than the visual border after each
    keystroke). The Pinyin Syllabus design is essentially an “initial + final”
    (ShuangPin) layout available in many commercial Pinyin input methods and research
    prototypes (e.g. Liu et al [5]).

    The novelty of this submission primarily lies in the implementation and evaluation
    of common optimized Pinyin layouts on a new platform (i.e. smart watches) rather
    than inventing new techniques for Pinyin input. However, there are two major
    concerns regarding the evaluation session:

    * Negative outcome. Both the Growing Finals technique and  the Pinyin Syllabus
    were slower than the baseline QWERTY. While negative results could still be
    valuable and inspirational if the authors go deeper in data analysis and reveal
    some interesting insights. Unfortunately, the data analysis in this submission is
    pretty shallow and the authors didn’t go beyond comparing some common metrics
    across these three techniques. In retrospect, this result is not surprising -  all
    the new designs focused on reducing the syllabus entry time of Pinyin, but the
    real bottleneck of pinyin input is the choice reaction time [ref2], which was not
    improved at all in the proposed systems. In addition, a dynamic layout which
    changes after each keystroke may lead to increased choice-reaction time because it
    will be harder for the experienced users to  memorize key-stroke patterns or
    transfer their existing skills in QWERTY input.


    * Incorrect Data Analysis. As reported by the authors, they used a one factor
    (three levels) within-subjects design with 15 participants. As such, the degrees-
    of-freedom in the follow-up analysis should be F(2, 14) rather than F(2, 42) - the
    authors may have treated their experimental design as a between-subjects design in
    data analysis (pp4).  When reporting the results of pairwise comparisons, the
    authors should report both the p value and the DoF.


    Considering that 1) Chinese input in Pinyin is a well established research
    direction for over 30 years and 2) a short paper in MobileHCI has limited pages to
    report research findings, the writing in the current draft should be significantly
    tightened to focus on truly novel ideas. For example, a major portion of the
    contents in pp2 can be reduced by citing related work. At the same time, some
    unique design details, such as how the location and sizes of the growing finals
    should be included to justify the current design.

    In summary, given the limited novelty in proposed new techniques and flaws in the
    current experimental analysis, I believe this submission does not include
    sufficient contributions to the research community at this moment and I argue for
    rejecting it.


    [Ref1] MacKenzie S. et al, LetterWise: Prefix-based Disambiguation for Mobile Text
    Input, UIST 2001.
    [Ref2] Wang, J. et al, Chinese Input with Keyboard and Eye-tracking: an Anatomical
    Study, CHI 2001.

  Expertise

    Expert

----------------------------------------------------------------
